# 30/6/2018

## [Nested Session Types](http://mrg.doc.ic.ac.uk/publications/nested-protocols-in-session-types/subsessioncam.pdf)

Session types can be enforced through either compile-time program analysis or run-time monitoring. Compile-time is near impossible for Matrix, since most code will be a black box. Run-time is only possible if the session type yields enough information to properly parse the network packets. Doing neither is impractical.

References [9](http://mrg.doc.ic.ac.uk/publications/dynamic-multirole-session-types/dynamic-multirole-session-types.pdf) and 10 might be worth looking at for ideas. They are heavy on mu and pi calculus, so maybe not.

[Reference 15](http://oceanleadership.org/) is a practical use for session types, though I cannot find any information about this on their website.

## [HTTP Protocol](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2616)

An HTTP client can send multiple requests before receiving a response, called pipelining, making a complicated recursive protocol. However, a connection that fails during pipelining cannot be pipelined on retry.

Simple HTTP: `! Request . ? Response . end!`

Simple Pipelined HTTP (allows sending any number of requests, then receiving a response for each): `(fix (\x:ST->ST. \y:ST. ! Request . +{ pipeline: x (? Response . y), wait: ? Response . y })) end`

```Haskell
(fix (\x -> \y ->
    Send STRING $
        Choose (Map.fromList [
            ("pipeline", x (Recv INT y)),
            ("wait", Recv INT y)
        ])
    )) Wait
```

## Ideas

Could matrix be exposed similar to any other networked peer, to allow programs to report stats and request monitoring data at run-time?

Maybe in the heirachy of TCP - HTTP - JSON, TCP will not be a session type but rather some sort of transport type, then HTTP will be a session type, and JSON a normal type that is used in send and receive parts of HTTP. This eliminates complex nesting of session types.

### Recursive Session Types

Does `mu x . P(x)` just mean `a = P(a)`? How do we store a recursive type without storing an infinitely large type? Maybe this will work, though it is limited to a single bound variable, and may complicate subtyping. Also, do we want to be able to use `fix !String.(dual x)` for simple chat?

```Haskell
data Type = STRING | ...

type Branches = Map String SessionType
type RBranches = Map String RecursiveST

data RecursiveST
    = Plain SessionType
    | RSend Type RecursiveST
    | RRecv Type RecursiveST
    | RChoose RBranches
    | ROffer RBranches
    | X

data SessionType
    = Wait
    | Kill
    | Send Type SessionType
    | Recv Type SessionType
    | Choose Branches
    | Offer Branches
    | Fix RecursiveST

foreverChat :: SessionType
foreverChat = Fix . RChoose $ fromList [("end",Plain Wait),("continue",RSend STRING $ RRecv STRING X)]
```

This does not appear to be powerful enough for pipelined HTTP.

What if we use [Recursion Schemes](https://blog.sumtypeofway.com/an-introduction-to-recursion-schemes/)?

```Haskell
data Type = STRING | ...

type Branches a = Map String a

data SessionTypeF a
    = Wait
    | Kill
    | Send Type a
    | Recv Type a
    | Choose (Branches a)
    | Offer (Branches a)
    | FixP a
    | X Integer

instance Functor SessionTypeF where
    fmap _ Wait = Wait
    fmap _ Kill = Kill
    fmap f (Send t s) = Send t (f s)
    fmap f (Recv t s) = Recv t (f s)
    fmap f (Choose m) = Choose (fmap f m)
    fmap f (Offer m) = Offer (fmap f m)
    fmap f (FixP s) = Fix (f s)
    fmap f (X x) = X x

type SessionType = Fix SessionTypeF
```

This needs more work... We may need a modified version of session types that allows concatenation of session types to allow for HTTP. Subtyping has to be worked out too.

The problem is, how do you force a person to use our recursion constructor rather than defining their own type recursively? Smart constructors only work if the condition can be checked, but checking if something is infinite could take infinite time (undecidable).

Detect it when parsing! Write the type dependence as a directed graph, then detect and remove cycles!

------

For Session Types to be useful, a session type has to be converted to a "language" of accepted communications, and hence a sort of parser. The send/receive/wait/kill are relatively easy to parse (assuming we have a parser for the types being sent), but what about choose and offer?

Should a session type have the ability to carry metadata, such as version number, or a parser for the offers/chooses?

-----

Maybe a session type should be able to be wrapped in something to make it a normal type expressing part of a stream of bytes, which can then be enclosed in a session type. For example,

```
HTTP = ...
TCP a = ? (Data a) . ! Unit . end

HTTPoverTCP = TCP HTTP
```

How do we express the fact that the inner session type must have ended before the outer does? Or do we?

### Parsing Typed Connections

To monitor data being sent through a protocol that was specified by a session type, we must be able to parse the communication. Most importantly, this requires us to be able to recognise which choice has been made. This could be done by indexing our maps with String -> Bool checkers, but these cannot be ordered or compared for equality.

Instead, we can use regular languages. Since the minimal DFA of any regular language is unique, these can be checked for equality, and possibly compared to index a map. At compile time, we simply parse a given regular expression and convert it to a minimal DFA (maybe cache to avoid repetition).
