# 21/4/2018

## Session Types

See http://simonjf.com/2016/05/28/session-type-implementations.html for most sources.

These allow for typed protocols to be expressed. There are essentially 6 components:

* `end?` waits for the connection to close
* `end!` actively closes the connection
* `!a.b` is the protocol that sends a value of type `a` and then does protocol `b`
* `?a.b` is the protocol that receives a value of type `a` and then does protocol `b`
* `+{a:b,c:d}` is the protocol that chooses between protocols `b` or `d`, labeled with `a` and `c` respectively
* `&{a:b,c:d}` is the protocol that offers the choice between protocols `b` or `d`, labeled with `a` and `c` respectively

There is also a notion of duality, where dual protocols are compatible. `end?` and `end!` are duals, `!a.b` and `?a.c` are duals if `b` and `c` are duals, and `+{a:b,c:d}` and `&{a:e,c:f}` are duals if `b` and `e` are duals and `d` and `f` are duals. Thus a client might have protocol `!String.&{ref:?String.end!,val:?Int.end!}` and a server might have protocol `?String.+{ref:!String.end?,val:!Int.end?}`, and the pair would be able to communicate.

Sometimes `end?` and `end!` are merged into a single statement `end`.

Making a recursive or looping protocol can be significantly more complicated, or it can be lazily embedded.

[Scribble](http://www.scribble.org/) is a protocol description language that makes these ideas look more imperative.

Note that `&{a:b,c:d}` and `+{a:e}` are compatible when `b` and `e` are duals, so duality can imply compatibility but not the other way around.

### Type Sessions and RAML

The RAML interface

```
/songs:
    get:
    post:
    /{songId}:
        get:
/artists:
    get:
    post:
```

could be represented by the server Session Type

```
&
    { songs: &
        { get: ! String . end!
        , post: ? Song . end?
        , dir: ? ID . ! String . end!
        }
    , artists: &
        { get: ! String . end!
        , post: ? Artist . end?
        }
    }
```

and the corresponding client Session Type

```
+
    { songs: +
        { get: ? String . end?
        , post: ! Song . end!
        , dir: ! ID . ? String . end?
        }
    , artists: +
        { get: ? String . end?
        , post: ! Artist . end!
        }
    }
```

### Session Types and Composition

Is there a sensible way to compose Session Types?

```
a = ? Int . ! String . end
b = ? String . ! Object . end
c = ! Int . ? Object . end
```

It makes some sense that composing `a` and `b` could make something compatible with `c`, but can we generalise this? Is it useful?
