# 3/7/2018

## [HTTP Protocol](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2616)

With fixpoints and concatenation, making a session type for HTTP should be much easier.

HTTP 1.0: `!HTTPRequest; ?HTTPResponse`

HTTP 1.1: `µt. (!HTTPRequest; +{ sendMore: t, wait: end }; ?HTTPResponse; +{ sendMore: t, wait: end })`

This is somewhat of an abstraction, as the client may receive a response before it has finished sending requests.

Note that HTTP 1.1 is not a subtype of HTTP 1.0, and hence the two will be marked as not compatible, when they are actually compatible.

## [UDP Protocol](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc768)

What is a pseudo-header? Is this part of IP?

UDP "Client": `µt. (+{ send: !UDPPacket, wait: end }; &{ reply: ?UDPPacket, none: end }; t )`

UDP "Server": `µt. (&{ send: ?UDPPacket, wait: end }; +{ reply: !UDPPacket, none: end }; t )`

This makes the protocol look more complicated than it really is, in order to enforce a client-server role on this communication.

## [TCP Protocol](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc793)

Simple Handshake: `!SynTCP; ?SynAckTCP; !AckTCP`

This protocol is so complex it looks more like both parties are simply throwing packets at each other rather than anything more structured. The potential for re-ordering of packets and crashes complicate this further. A session type like UDP's would cover this behavior.

## Weaknesses of new Session Types model

The same protocol can have multiple representations. For example,
`+{ a: x; z, b: y; z }` and `+{ a: x, b: y }; z` could represent the same protocol, and
`x; µt.(+{ a: end, b: y;x;t })` and `µt.(+{ a: end, b: x;y;t }); x` could represent the same protocol. However, since their labelling and human interpretation are different, this is probably ok.
