# 29/4/2018

## Thoughts

Can we express something like a protocol negotiation using session types? Since the two parties may have any configuration of partially overlapping sets of protocols, it is impossible to capture this with a simple option/choose pair, as that pair could be considered incompatible even when they have some overlap.

Maybe this is possible with a protocol type, so the server type is
```
! List Protocol . &
    { choose: ? Protocol . Something
    , done: end!
    }
```
and the client is the dual. That something will depend on the protocol, so we would need to be able to define functions from values to session types.

The alternative is to create a new session type constructor for offer/choose that is compatible when there is any overlap.

## Union Composition

To apply weak unioning of session types would create some complexity, since `? Int . ! String . &{a:b}` and `? Int . ! String . &{c:d}` could technically be unioned into `? Int . ! String . &{a:b,c:d}`, an automaton communicating to the union would have to send its first integer somewhere to get a response before choosing between `a` and `c`, and in the worst case the response from the first machine makes it choose `c` and the response from the second makes it choose `a`.

However, strict unioning seems too strict, since `&{a:b,c:d}` and `&{c:d,e:f}` can be unioned into `&{a:b,c:d,e:f}`, and it is relatively easy to send the communications straight to one automaton or the other. We can even load balance the `c` requests. This has been implemented as a smart union.

Should we be unioning the chooses or just the offers?

## Function Composition

The way to achieve function composition in a simple system like combining `? a . ! b . end` and `? b . ! c . end` into `? a . ! c . end` would be to make a third automaton that takes the data, sends it to the first, receives the response and sends it to the second, then sends the response back to the original sender. This may seem complicated, but for automata using TCP it's the only possibility.

This approach is difficult to generalise, since it basically involves handing over the client from one server to another at some point, and when exactly that happens cannot be determined from the session types alone.
